DBSCAN

May correspond to meaningful taxonomies
Once a decision is made to combine two clusters, it can’t be undone
Too slow for large data sets, O(𝑛2 log(𝑛))



MinPts – minimum number of points in the given neighbourhood Nε(q)
q is called a core object (or core point) if |Nε(q)| ≥ MinPts

High Density v.s. Low Density

Two parameters
Eps (ε): Maximum radius of the neighborhood
MinPts : Minimum number of points in the Eps-neighborhood of a point
High density: ε-Neighborhood of an object contains at least MinPts of objects
Low density : ε-Neighborhood of an object does not contain at MinPts of objects

Core point: A core point is one in which at least have minPts number of points (including the point itself) in its surrounding region within the radius eps: $if |N (p)|≥ MinPts§

Border point: has fewer than MinPts within its ϵ-neighborhood (N), but it lies in the neighborhood of another core point.

Noise point: A noise point (outlier) is neither a core point and nor is it reachable from any core points.


Direct density reachability

An object p is directly density-reachable from object q if (1) q is a core object and (2) p is in q’s
ε-neighborhood. A point p is density-reachable from a point q if there is a chain of points p1, ..., pn, p1 = q, pn =
p such that p is directly density-reachable from . i+1 pi

Density connectivity

A point p is density-connected to a point q if there is a point o such that both p and q are density-reachable from o

DBSCAN Clustering Algorithm
We start with the data points and values of eps and minPts as input:
 Out of n unvisited sample data points, we'll first move through each point in a loop and
mark each one as visited.
 From each point, we'll look at the distance to every other point in the dataset.
 All points that fall within the neighborhood radius hyperparameter (eps) should be
considered as neighbors.
 The number of neighbors should be at least as many as the minimum points required
(MinPts).
 If the minimum point threshold is reached, the points should be grouped together as a
cluster, or else marked as noise.
 This process should be repeated until all data points are categorized in clusters or as noise.

DBSCAN is also more effective against outliers and noise than k-means or hierarchical
clustering.

page 21

Finding the Optimal value of Eps

Rather than experimenting with different 
values of epsilon, we can use the elbow
point detection method to arrive at a
suitable value of epsilon.

Approach
Average the distance between each
point and its k-NearestNeighbors (e.g.
k = MinPts) and plot the average kdistances in ascending order on a kdistance graph.
The optimal value for epsilon is the
point with maximum curvature or
bend, i.e. at the greatest slope.


k-mean vs. HClustering vs. DBSCAN

1. kmeans and hierarchical clustering are good when you have some idea regarding the
number of clusters in your data.
2. DBSCAN, instead, takes a more bottom-up approach by working with your
hyperparameters and finding the clusters it views as important. It is robust to noise and
can detect arbitrarily-shaped clusters.
3. Compared to k-means and hierarchical clustering, DBSCAN can be seen as being
potentially more efficient, since it only has to look at each data point once.
4. K-means and hierarchical clustering requires multiple iterations of finding new centroids
and evaluating where their nearest neighbors are, once a point has been assigned to a
cluster in DBSCAN, it does not change cluster membership.
5. No need to pass a number of clusters to DBSCAN and hierarchical clustering both share, in comparison with k-means.


k-mean vs. HClustering vs.DBSCAN

kmeans and hierarchical clustering are good when you have some idea regarding the
number of clusters in your data.
DBSCAN, instead, takes a more bottom-up approach by working with your
hyperparameters and finding the clusters it views as important. It is robust to noise and
can detect arbitrarily-shaped clusters.
Compared to k-means and hierarchical clustering, DBSCAN can be seen as being
potentially more efficient, since it only has to look at each data point once.
K-means and hierarchical clustering requires multiple iterations of finding new centroids
and evaluating where their nearest neighbors are, once a point has been assigned to a
cluster in DBSCAN, it does not change cluster membership.
No need to pass a number of clusters to DBSCAN and hierarchical clustering both share, in
comparison with k-means.
